---
layout: default
title: Introduction to x86_64 assembly
date: 2020-12-30
categories: [assembly]
tags: [none]
---
## {{ page.title }}

There are sixteen general-purpose registers. The lower 32 bits, 16 bits, and 8 bits of each register are addressable.
Also are eight 80-bit floating point and 64-bit `MMX` registers, of which are overlaid, sixteen 128bit `XMM` registers
and one 64-bit `RFLAGS` register. The higher 32 bits of `RFLAGS` are reserved and unused.

### Calling Conventions 

With Windows x64 the calling convention is the Microsoft 64 calling convention used for C style function calling.
Under Linux this would be called the Application Binary Interface (ABI).

The registers `rax`, `rcx`, `rdx`, `r8`, `r9`, `r10`, `r11` are considered volatile (caller-saved).

The registers `rbx`, `rdi`, `rsi`, `rbp`, `rsp`, `r12`, `r13`, `r14`, and `r15` are considered nonvolatile
(callee-saved).


### Microsoft 64 Calling Conventions

- `rcx`, `rdx`, `r8`, `r9` are used for integer and pointer arguments in that order left to right.
- `xmm0`, `xmm1`, `xmm2`, and `xmm3` are used for floating point arguments.
- Additional arguments are pushed on the stack left to right.
- It is the caller's responsibility to allocate 32 bytes of "shadow space" (for storing `rcx`, `rdx`, `r8`, `r9` 
if needed) before calling the function.
- It is the caller's responsibility to clean the stack after the call.
- The stack is 16-byte aligned. The `call` instruction pushes an 8-byte return value, All non-leaf functions must 
adjust the stack by a value of the form 16n+8 when allocating stack space.
		

### Linux Application Binary Interface

- In user-level applications, the first six integer or pointer arguments are passed in registers 
`rdi`, `rsi`, `rdx`, `rcx`, `r8`, `r9`.
	
- In kernel mode the interface is `rdi`, `rsi`, `rdx`, `r10`, `r8`, `r9`.
	
- Integer return values up to 64 bits in size are stored in `rax` while values up to 128 bit are stored 
in `rax` and `rdx`.
	
- The number of the syscall has to be passed in register `rax`.
- A system-call is done via the `syscall` instruction. The kernel destroys registers `rcx` and `r11`.

- Returning from the `syscall`, register `rax` contains the result of the system-call. A value in the range between 
`-4095` and `-1` indicates an error, it is `-errno`.

- The stack pointer `rsp` must be aligned to a 16-byte boundary before making a call.


### References

- [AMD Software Developer's Manuals](href="https://developer.amd.com/resources/developer-guides-manuals/
"AMD Software Developer's Manuals")
- [Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer's Manuals](
http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/processors/architectures-software-developer-manuals.html
"Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer's Manuals")
- [Linux system call list](https://filippo.io/linux-syscall-table/ "Linux system call list")
- [Linux Application Binary Interface](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/hjl-tools/x86-psABI/x86-64-psABI-1.0.pdf 
"Linux Application Binary Interface")
- [Windows system call list](https://j00ru.vexillium.org/syscalls/nt/64/ "Windows system call list")
- [Windows x64 Calling Convention](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/x64-calling-convention?view=vs-2019 
"Windows x64 Calling Convention")
